NEP: Adjust NEP-35 to make it more user-accessible (#17093)
numpy/numpy: doc/neps/nep-0035-array-creation-dispatch-with-array-function.rst

:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-10-15
:Updated: 2020-08-17
:Resolution:

Abstract
--------

We propose the introduction of a new keyword argument ``like=`` to all array
creation functions, this argument permits the creation of an array based on
a non-NumPy reference array passed via that argument, resulting in an array
defined by the downstream library implementing that type, which also implements
the ``__array_function__`` protocol. With this we address one of that
protocol's shortcomings, as described by NEP 18 [1]_.

Motivation and Scope
--------------------

Many are the libraries implementing the NumPy API, such as Dask for graph
computing, CuPy for GPGPU computing, xarray for N-D labeled arrays, etc. All
the libraries mentioned have yet another thing in common: they have also adopted

> the ``__array_function__`` protocol. The protocol defines a mechanism allowing a

Reviewer: I would make this part as obvious as possible. Something along the lines of 

```
the ``__array_function__`` protocol; a protocol that allows NumPy to understand
how to treat downstream objects as if they are the native ndarray object. Hence
the community while using various libraries, still use a unified NumPy API. This 
not only brings great convenience for standardization but also removes the 
burden of relearning/recoding the same things for every other new object.
```

I am not sure about the exact wording but intention would in the ballpark.

Author: I did a few minor tweaks and added a comment that this mechanism is called a "dispatcher", just for the benefit of the rest of the proposal. Let me know if something is still unclear with the new phrasing.

user to directly use the NumPy API as a dispatcher based on the input array
type. In essence, dispatching means users are able to pass a downstream array,
such as a Dask array, directly to one of NumPy's compute functions, and NumPy
will be able to automatically recognize that and send the work back to Dask's
implementation of that function, which will define the return value. For
example:

.. code:: python

    x = dask.array.arange(5)    # Creates dask.array

>     np.sum(a)                   # Returns dask.array

Reviewer: This is probably `np.sum(x)` right? I think a better candidate function would be np.diff or np.exp since the result would still be obviously an array. Here a sum might reduce down to a scalar.

Reviewer: Assuming dask has `diff` or `exp` obviously.

Author: Agreed, it feels more natural to use something that returns an array by NumPy as well. It's not relevant for the discussion here or the NEP itself, but just wanted to note that Dask is doing lazy computation, so `np.sum(x)` would still return a Dask array, you would require `np.sum(x).compute()` to get the value of the sum.

Note above how we called Dask's implementation of ``sum`` via the NumPy
namespace by calling ``np.sum``, and the same would apply if we had a CuPy
array or any other array from a library that adopts ``__array_function__``.
This allows writing code that is agnostic to the implementation library, thus
users can write their code once and still be able to use different array
implementations according to their needs.

> Unfortunately, ``__array_function__`` has limitations, one of them being array

Reviewer: Ah this was my initial misunderstanding. How about this? 

```
Obviously, having a protocol in-place is useful if the arrays are created
somewhere else and let NumPy handle them. But still these arrays have
to be started in their native library and brought back. Instead if it was
actually possible to create these objects through NumPy API then there
would be an almost full experience all using NumPy syntax. For example, 
say we have some CuPy object ``C`` , and want a similar CuPy array with all ones
 in it. We could still write 

.. code:: python
    x = cupy.array.ones(....)  # I don't know cupy syntax for this.

But instead the better way would be `x = np.ones([100, 25], like=C)` then
magically `x` will also be a CuPy array, learning from the type of ``C``.

Author: Reused your structure but changed the wording a bit, let me know if it's clear enough like that or if there's room for improvement still.

for array creation functions, in the example the input of ``arange`` is simply
the integer ``5``, not providing any information of the array type that should
be the result, that's where a reference array passed by the ``like=`` argument
proposed here can be of help, as it provides NumPy with the information
required to create the expected type of array.

The new ``like=`` keyword proposed is solely intended to identify the downstream
library where to dispatch and the object is used only as reference, meaning that
no modifications, copies or processing will be performed on that object.

We expect that this functionality will be mostly useful to library developers,
allowing them to create new arrays for internal usage based on arrays passed
by the user, preventing unnecessary creation of NumPy arrays that will
ultimately lead to an additional conversion into a downstream array type.

Support for Python 2.7 has been dropped since NumPy 1.17, therefore we make use
of the keyword-only argument standard described in PEP-3102 [2]_ to implement
``like=``, thus preventing it from being passed by position.

.. _neps.like-kwarg.usage-and-impact:

> Usage and Impact

Reviewer: This section is a nice read much clearer than what I tried to understand. Would it be possible to give a few sentences for the regular NumPy users who won't use this feature?

Reviewer: I mean what they would see and possibly avoid if this is implemented.

Author: I added a sentence at the end, but to be honest, I'm not sure if that's what you meant. Let me know if that addresses your question or if I completely misunderstood your suggestion. :)

:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2019-10-15
:Updated: 2020-08-17
:Resolution:

Abstract
--------

We propose the introduction of a new keyword argument ``like=`` to all array

> creation functions, this argument permits the creation of an array based on
> a non-NumPy reference array passed via that argument, resulting in an array
> defined by the downstream library implementing that type, which also implements
> the ``__array_function__`` protocol. With this we address one of that
> protocol's shortcomings, as described by NEP 18 [1]_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
creation functions to address one of the shortcomings of `__array_function__`,
(see NEP 18 [1]_). The `like` kwarg will create an instance of the type of the
argument, enabling direct creation of non-NumPy arrays. The target array type
must implement the ``__array_function__`` protocol.
```

Author: I did a few changes to your suggestion, but adopted the new structure you suggested in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/69e3e7186a39abeead5adf8edba5a24d71e96cb9 . Thanks @mattip.

Motivation and Scope
--------------------

> Many are the libraries implementing the NumPy API, such as Dask for graph

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many libraries implement the NumPy API, such as Dask for graph
```

> computing, CuPy for GPGPU computing, xarray for N-D labeled arrays, etc. All
> the libraries mentioned have yet another thing in common: they have also adopted
> the ``__array_function__`` protocol; a protocol that allows NumPy to understand

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
computing, CuPy for GPGPU computing, xarray for N-D labeled arrays, etc. Underneath,
they have adopted the ``__array_function__`` protocol which allows NumPy to understand
```

and treat downstream objects as if they are the native ``numpy.ndarray`` object.
Hence the community while using various libraries still benefits from a unified
NumPy API. This not only brings great convenience for standardization but also
removes the burden of learning a new API and rewriting code for every new
object. In more technical terms, this mechanism of the protocol is called a
"dispatcher", which is the terminology we use from here onwards when referring
to that.

.. code:: python

    x = dask.array.arange(5)    # Creates dask.array
    np.diff(x)                  # Returns dask.array

> Note above how we called Dask's implementation of ``sum`` via the NumPy

Author: Thanks, totally missed this!

This allows writing code that is agnostic to the implementation library, thus
users can write their code once and still be able to use different array
implementations according to their needs.

Obviously, having a protocol in-place is useful if the arrays are created
elsewhere and let NumPy handle them. But still these arrays have to be started
in their native library and brought back. Instead if it was possible to create
these objects through NumPy API then there would be an almost complete
experience, all using NumPy syntax. For example, say we have some CuPy array
``cp_arr``, and want a similar CuPy array with identity matrix. We could still
write the following:

> .. code:: python

Reviewer 3: this isn't rendering - need a blank line below a reST directive. 

(and same for the next example a few lines below)

Author: Thanks @rgommers , I fixed that also in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/57f78df125892eaa4539913759f3ac29ff4aef6a .

> Obviously, having a protocol in-place is useful if the arrays are created
> elsewhere and let NumPy handle them. But still these arrays have to be started
> in their native library and brought back. Instead if it was possible to create
> these objects through NumPy API then there would be an almost complete
> experience, all using NumPy syntax. For example, say we have some CuPy array

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The mechanism as described above covers cases where the input is already an array.
These  arrays have to be created. NumPy provides `array creation routines` like 
`np.ones` but how to use these to create a CuPy or Dask array? For example,
say we have some CuPy array
```

Reviewer: This was one of the reasons why I got confused in the beginning. "Why should I even be able to create other arrays if I am already using those libs? I can create via CuPy or Dask whatever I need".

 That detail is being lost with this compact narrative.

Author: This was suggested in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093#discussion_r471750471 . Given that the intent was to make the NEP clearer to users, I agree with @ilayn that the detail is getting lost.

> ``cp_arr`` , and want a similar CuPy array with identity matrix. We could still

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
``cp_arr``, and want a similar CuPy array with identity matrix. We could still
```

.. code:: python
     x = cupy.identity(3)

Instead, the better way would be using to only use the NumPy API, this could now
be achieved with:

.. code:: python

>     x = np.identity(3, like=cp_arr)

Reviewer 4: Perhaps out of scope, but... Should this copy the dtype from the `like` argument? How about cupy-specific metadata?

Reviewer 5: This is a valid comment. It should create the array on the same GPU as the original. In the context of Dask, it would copy the chunk-sizes, and for Sparse, it would copy the format.

However, I don't think this detail needs to be discussed, and currently `__array_function__` only passes through the type. One can cheat and copy from `self` though, as it isn't a `classmethod`.

Reviewer 4: I think the "same GPU" remark is most salient here. I think we should clarify the wording of "does no processing or copying" to either allow for this, or deliberately declare it out of scope.

Author: > Perhaps out of scope, but... Should this copy the dtype from the like argument? How about cupy-specific metadata?

Array creation functions will generally specify this type of information via arguments, whereas `like=` is used to identify where to dispatch. I don't think we would be able to detect that, and I'm even less sure we would want that, as where we would expect `like=` to be used to already have the correct arguments defined by the library using it.

> This is a valid comment. It should create the array on the same GPU as the original.
> ...
> I think the "same GPU" remark is most salient here

This is not possible, GPU arrays don't store this information, those arrays only know the pointer. The GPU where it's created is based on the current context selected by the library, such as `with cupy.cuda.Device(0):` . With that said, it's _always_ the responsibility of the code to define that, regardless of what this NEP is doing.

As if by magic, ``x`` will also be a CuPy array, as NumPy was capable to infer
that from the type of ``cp_arr``. Note that this last step would not be possible
without ``like=``, as it would be impossible for the NumPy to know the user
expects a CuPy array based only on the integer input.

> The new ``like=`` keyword proposed is solely intended to identify the downstream
> library where to dispatch and the object is used only as reference, meaning that
> no modifications, copies or processing will be performed on that object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new ``like=`` keyword proposed is solely intended to dispatch to the
downstream library.  The object is used only as a reference, meaning that
no modifications, copies or processing will be performed on that object.
```

Author: Same as in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093#discussion_r473167902 . I think we'll be missing a small detail that might make things more confusing to users.

We expect that this functionality will be mostly useful to library developers,
allowing them to create new arrays for internal usage based on arrays passed
by the user, preventing unnecessary creation of NumPy arrays that will

> ultimately lead to an additional conversion into a downstream array type.

Reviewer 6: This section is wonderful, thank you @pentschev for writing it. =) Definitely exactly what I was looking for. =) The only thing I think would be useful is to have a *complete* usage example, "eg here is scikit-learn k-means now — without any option to create like, even if it works with a CuPy array as input it will end up with a NumPy array as output. But after this NEP and modifying the code to look like below, it will work completely within CuPy, or dask, or other arrays implementing this protocol."

~~I was trying to rack my brain for examples in scikit-image that need this, but can't come up with any off the top of my head. Happy to go hunting for one, but I figure there might be existing examples that motivated this NEP in the first place and that would be simple enough to be included?~~

Update: my_pad below is sufficient. I wonder whether it belongs in this section rather than the next one, ie move up to line 113 (cupy's TypeError) into this section, then start the next section.

Author: > This section is wonderful, thank you @pentschev for writing it. =) Definitely exactly what I was looking for. =)

To be fair this is not a new addition, it was already in the original text, it just got moved a bit. See https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0035-array-creation-dispatch-with-array-function.html#usage-guidance .

> Update: my_pad below is sufficient.

I'm not sure if you mean that `my_pad` already addresses the "complete usage example" you mentioned above or the strikethrough text. Are you confirming the existing example suffices?

> I wonder whether it belongs in this section rather than the next one, ie move up to line 113 (cupy's TypeError) into this section, then start the next section.

I tried to follow the [NEP X -- Template and Instructions](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-template.html#usage-and-impact). To my understanding, it should belong in the "Motivation and Scope" section, where it is now.

"Motivation and Scope: ... It should describe the existing problem, *who it affects*, what it is trying to solve, and why."

Reviewer 6: Yes, my_pad is sufficient, and I agree, it belongs in motivation and scope, but it is currently in Usage, and I was asking whether it should be moved to motivation and scope.

Author: > Yes, my_pad is sufficient, and I agree, it belongs in motivation and scope, but it is currently in Usage, and I was asking whether it should be moved to motivation and scope.

Are we still talking about the paragraph saying "We expect that this functionality will be mostly useful to library developers, ..."? That is in Motivation and Scope already, not in Usage and Impact.

of the keyword-only argument standard described in PEP-3102 [2]_ to implement
``like=``, thus preventing it from being passed by position.

.. _neps.like-kwarg.usage-and-impact:

Usage and Impact
----------------

NumPy users who don't use other arrays from downstream libraries can continue
to use array creation routines without a ``like=`` argument. Using
``like=np.ndarray`` will work as if no array was passed via that argument.
However, this will incur additional checks that will negatively impact
performance.

To understand the intended use for ``like=``, and before we move to more complex
cases, consider the following illustrative example consisting only of NumPy and
CuPy arrays:

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np
    import cupy

>     def my_pad(arr, padding):
>         padding = np.array(padding, like=arr)
>         return np.concatenate((padding, arr, padding))

Reviewer 4: This code would work just fine without the second line. To motivate it, perhaps:
```suggestion
    def my_pad(arr, padding):
        # coerce `padding` just once, rather than letting `concatenate` do it twice
        padding = np.array(padding, like=arr)
        return np.concatenate((padding, arr, padding))
```

Author: > This code would work just fine without the second line.

I don't get this comment, are you saying it works without the `np.concatenate`?

Reviewer 2: The naive reader may not understand why the call to `padding = np.array(padding, like=arr)` is needed.

Reviewer 2: .. but then it is explained in the text below.

Note in the ``my_pad`` function above how ``arr`` is used as a reference to
dictate what array type padding should have, before concatenating the arrays to
produce the result. On the other hand, if ``like=`` wasn't used, the NumPy case

> case would still work, but CuPy wouldn't allow this kind of automatic

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
would still work, but CuPy wouldn't allow this kind of automatic
```

Reviewer 2: What happens in this example if I call `my_pad([1, 2, 3], [-1, 1])`?

Reviewer 4: @mattip: Good question. I'd prefer the answer to be "coercion to `np.array`" I think.

Author: > What happens in this example if I call my_pad([1, 2, 3], [-1, 1])?

Same as you would see without `like=arr`:

```python
In [1]: import numpy as np
   ...:
   ...: def my_pad(arr, padding):
   ...:     padding = np.array(padding, like=arr)
   ...:     return np.concatenate((padding, arr, padding))
   ...:
   ...: a = my_pad([1, 2, 3], [-1, -1])
   ...: print(type(a))
   ...: print(a)
   ...:
<class 'numpy.ndarray'>
[-1 -1  1  2  3 -1 -1]
```

Reviewer 2: I meant that in this case it would call `np.array([-1, -1], like=[1, 2, 3])`, and `list` doesn't have an `__array_function__`. Would it raise an error? I guess a more complete example would call `arr = np.arraylike(arr)` in the first line, so never mind.

Author: It wouldn't raise an error, it's expected to work as other functions implementing `__array_function__`, where dispatching on a `list` would just fallback to NumPy's default behavior.

conversion, ultimately raising a
``TypeError: Only cupy arrays can be concatenated`` exception.

Now we should look at how a library like Dask could benefit from ``like=``.
Before we understand that, it's important to understand a bit about Dask basics

> and ensures correctness with ``__array_function__``. Note that Dask can compute
> different sorts of objects, like dataframes, bags and arrays, here we will focus
> strictly on arrays, which are the objects we can use ``__array_function__``
> with.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and ensures correctness with ``__array_function__``. Note that Dask can compute
with different sorts of objects, like dataframes, bags and arrays: here we will focus
strictly on arrays, which are the objects we can use ``__array_function__``
with.
```

Author: I may be wrong as English is not my native language, but I think you "compute something" and not "compute _with_ something", adding "with" sounds strange to me. Can you provide a grammatical reference to that?

Reviewer 4: "compute different sorts of objects" implies the objects are the outputs of the computation, but what seems relevant is the inputs. Some perhaps better phrasings:

* compute over ....
* perform computations with ...
* perform computations on ...

Author: Changed that in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/3d527eacf5064b4ab7dcd4c20de952fe37d931d5 .

Dask uses a graph computing model, meaning it breaks down a large problem in

> many smaller problems and merge their results to reach the final result. To

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
many smaller problems and merges their results to reach the final result. To
```

break the problem down into smaller ones, Dask also breaks arrays into smaller

> arrays, that it calls "chunks". A Dask array can thus consist of one or more

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
arrays that it calls "chunks". A Dask array can thus consist of one or more
```

> chunks and they may be of different types. However, in the context of
> ``__array_function__``, Dask only allows chunks of the same type, for example,
> a Dask array can be formed of several NumPy arrays or several CuPy arrays, but
> not a mix of both.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
chunks and they may be of different types. However, in the context of
``__array_function__``, Dask only allows chunks of the same type; for example,
a Dask array can be formed of several NumPy arrays or several CuPy arrays, but
not a mix of both.
```

> To avoid mismatched types during compute, Dask keeps an attribute ``_meta`` as
> part of its array throughout computation, this attribute is used to both predict
> the output type at graph creation time and to create any intermediary arrays
> that are necessary within some function's computation. Going back to our
> previous example, we can use ``_meta`` information to identify what kind of
> array we would use for padding, as seen below:

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
To avoid mismatched types during computation, Dask keeps an attribute ``_meta`` as
part of its array throughout computation: this attribute is used to both predict
the output type at graph creation time, and to create any intermediary arrays
that are necessary within some function's computation. Going back to our
previous example, we can use ``_meta`` information to identify what kind of
array we would use for padding, as seen below:
```

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np
    import cupy
    import dask.array as da
    from dask.array.utils import meta_from_array

    def my_pad(arr, padding):

>         padding = np.array(padding, like=meta_from_array(arr))

Reviewer 6: This seems clunky... As a library writer, I want to *ignore* all cupy and dask code, but just have my library work seamlessly with them.

I guess I have to see how this is implemented but I would *assume* that `like=` passes the responsibility of array creation to downstream libraries. If so, couldn't we use `like=arr`, and leave it up to dask to give us an array primitive with the correct `_meta`?

What am I missing?

Reviewer 4: I think this example is trying to solve the same problem as brought up in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/files#r472995422.

I agree though, I'd expect `like=arr` to just work here.

Author: Sorry, this is meant to explain how you would write the code for Dask as a Dask maintainer, and how it's expected to be written in a possible Dask implementation of that function. I do understand how it may look strange for a non-Dask developer, but I thought it would be useful to write code that would look real and work in their native environments -- in that case, Dask. I could remove it if you want and only leave the CuPy example, but today Dask is one of the largest users (if not _the_ largest) of `__array_function__`, so I thought I would clarify how that addresses a more complex case too.

> I think this example is trying to solve the same problem as brought up in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/files#r472995422.
> 
> I agree though, I'd expect `like=arr` to just work here.

It's not the same problem, it's just that here we want a CuPy array, which is the chunk type, not a new Dask array backed by CuPy.

Reviewer 4: If this is a dask specific example, then calling the function `my_dask_pad` would make that intent clear.

Author: > If this is a dask specific example, then calling the function my_dask_pad would make that intent clear.

Fair enough, I did that change in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/2e30534564aaf49cb0a12baf6b721b7b31402647 .

    from dask.array.utils import meta_from_array

>     def my_dask_pad(arr, padding):

Reviewer 4: This begs the question _"Why can't I just use `my_pad` on dask arrays?"_.

Author: That is what is explained in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/files#diff-e62e74367c379dd1a3b21bc549c1eba6R166-R173 .

    my_pad(da.arange(5), [-1, -1])

    # Returns dask.array<concatenate, shape=(9,), dtype=int64, chunksize=(5,), chunktype=cupy.ndarray>
    my_pad(da.from_array(cupy.arange(5)), [-1, -1])

Note how ``chunktype`` in the return value above changes from
``numpy.ndarray`` in the first ``my_pad`` call to ``cupy.ndarray`` in the
second.

To enable proper identification of the array type we use Dask's utility function
``meta_from_array``, which was introduced as part of the work to support
``__array_function__``, allowing Dask to handle ``_meta`` appropriately. That
function is primarily targeted at the library's internal usage to ensure chunks
are created with correct types. Without the ``like=`` argument, it would be
impossible to ensure ``my_pad`` creates a padding array with a type matching

> that of the input array, which would cause cause a ``TypeError`` exception to

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
that of the input array, which would cause a ``TypeError`` exception to
```

be raised by CuPy, as discussed above would happen to the CuPy case alone.

Current NumPy users who don't use other arrays from downstream libraries should

> have no impact in their current usage of the NumPy API. In the event of the

Reviewer 4: This sentence doesn't make sense to me. Saying "users have no impact in their usage" of is missing a target of "impact" - impact against what?

Edit: @mattip's comment below resolves this

Author: This is resolved in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/a82cc4b5cb4c3926d2b555d9e8da1146c472a17c .

> Current NumPy users who don't use other arrays from downstream libraries should
> have no impact in their current usage of the NumPy API. In the event of the
> user passing a NumPy array to ``like=``, that will continue to work as if no
> array was passed via that argument. However, this is advised against, as
> internally there will be additional checks required that will have an impact in
> performance.
> 

Reviewer 2: Move this to the beginning of the section.
```suggestion
NumPy users who don't use other arrays from downstream libraries can
continue to use array creation routines without a `like` argument. Using
``like=ndarray``, will work as if no array was passed via that argument.
However, this will incur additional checks that will negatively impact
performance.

```

Author: Done in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/a82cc4b5cb4c3926d2b555d9e8da1146c472a17c .

> be raised by CuPy, as discussed above would happen to the CuPy case alone.

Reviewer 4: So to be clear:

* `my_pad(dask_array)` should work just fine, thanks to the `like` argument and `__array_function__`
*  `my_dask_pad(dask_array)` is an example of what code internal to dask might look like.

Mentioning `my_pad`  without comparing it to `my_dask_pad` makes reading this a little confusing to me

At any rate, it seems that `meta_from_array` is redundant here. Perhaps a more convincing example would be something like
```python
# disclaimer: I have never used dasked, I am guessing the API from your summary!
def pad_chunks(arr: dask.array, padding ):
    # we could use `np.array(padding, like=arr).chunks[0]`, but this is more direct
    padding = np.array(padding, like=meta_from_array(arr))
    return dask,from_chunks([padding] + arr.chunks + [padding])
```
where the key point is you don't actually need `meta_from_array` except:
* Inside `__array_function__`
* As an optimization inside dask-specific functions.

Author: > my_pad(dask_array) should work just fine, thanks to the like argument and __array_function__

It would work fine for a "pure" Dask array, that's backed by NumPy. It won't work fine for a CuPy-backed Dask array, which needs to be handled accordingly, thus the `meta_from_array` call.

`meta_from_array` would be redundant if a Dask Array wasn't and array wrapping another type of array, which is why we need to handle it properly.

Anyway, I tried improving the text in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/57f78df125892eaa4539913759f3ac29ff4aef6a , can you check if it makes things clearer?

array creation functions of NumPy. As examples of functions that would add this
new argument (but not limited to) we can cite those taking array-like objects
such as ``array`` and ``asarray``, functions that create arrays based on
numerical inputs such as ``range`` and ``identity``, as well as the ``empty``
family of functions, even though that may be redundant, since specializations

> for those already exist with the naming format ``empty_like``. As of the

Reviewer 6: Question: will `empty_like(<dask array>)` be the same as `empty(<dask array>.shape, like=<dask array>)`?

If not, then for me that seems to be an argument in favour of changing `like=` to `typeof=` as discussed on the mailing list. (Apologies if this is the wrong forum for this and/or if I'm late to the party.)

If so, then that affects the backwards compatibility section rather dramatically?

Author: > Question: will `empty_like(<dask array>)` be the same as `empty(<dask array>.shape, like=<dask array>)`?

Yes, it's the same, which is why I wrote those are "redundant".

> If not, then for me that seems to be an argument in favour of changing `like=` to `typeof=` as discussed on the mailing list. (Apologies if this is the wrong forum for this and/or if I'm late to the party.)

Using `like=` was indeed due to the existing `empty_like` functions, `like` as an argument (proposed in NEP-35) has the same meaning as the `_like` suffix in a function.

> If so, then that affects the backwards compatibility section rather dramatically?

Given my answers above, it shouldn't.

Reviewer 4: `empty_like` copies across the dtype, which is why I asked about that elsewhere in this PR..

Author: > empty_like copies across the dtype, which is why I asked about that elsewhere in this PR..

Yeah, that's a good point. It's still possible to get the same behavior, although it's not going to happen automatically as this is part of `empty_like` implementation itself.

Reviewer 6: > If so, then that affects the backwards compatibility section rather dramatically?

Currently, calling np.empty_like on a dask array will give a numpy array, right? And you're saying this proposal will change that behaviour to return a dask array? That is a massive behaviour change!

Author: > Currently, calling np.empty_like on a dask array will give a numpy array, right? And you're saying this proposal will change that behaviour to return a dask array? That is a massive behaviour change!

No, currently calling `np.empty_like` on a Dask array will return a Dask array. This NEP will _not_ change `empty_like`'s behavior whatsoever. However, calling `np.empty` on a Dask array will return a NumPy array, and this NEP adds a `like=` argument to `np.empty` (but not to `np.empty_like`), which allows it to return a Dask array _iff_ `like=dask_array`.

Reviewer 6: > No, currently calling np.empty_like on a Dask array will return a Dask array

🤯

Carry on. 😂

2.  To follow current implementation standards, documentation should be attached
    directly to the Python source code.

The first version of this proposal suggested the C implementation above as one
viable solution. However, due to the downsides pointed above we have decided to
implement that entirely in C. Please refer to [implementation]_ for details.

Alternatives
------------

> Recently a new protocol to replace ``__array_function__`` entirely was proposed

Reviewer: Whoa I didn't know this. Do we need any comparison over NEP 37 at this point? I know I am overreaching but sounds really interesting. I'll read that one after this.

Reviewer 8: Yup, the elephant in the room was never the syntax here :). NEP 37 is good context (I personally think the appendix may help understand some of the considerations). There are also these meeting notes (a lot in there was not actually discussed), but I am not sure it is approachable: https://github.com/numpy/archive/blob/master/other_meetings/2020-04-21-array-protocols_discussion_and_notes.md

I made https://github.com/seberg/numpy-dispatch with the hope we can get try the NEP 37 idea in libraries, I guess @shoyer might be working on a JAX prototype?

Well, this is just context for you though, if you are curious to dive into it.  In the end, I personally hope we can rope in library authors to help figure out what the right approach is probably, and the having something to play with helps, both with getting a feel of things and getting enthusiasm for experimenting.  (But that is just my sloppy way of saying it/take on this.)

2.  To follow current implementation standards, documentation should be attached
    directly to the Python source code.

The first version of this proposal suggested the C implementation above as one

> viable solution. However, due to the downsides pointed above we have decided to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
viable solution. However, due to the downsides pointed out above we have decided to
```

Author: Resolving outdated.

2.  To follow current implementation standards, documentation should be attached
    directly to the Python source code.

The first version of this proposal suggested the implementation above as one
viable solution for NumPy functions implemented in C. However, due to the

> downsides pointed above we have decided to discard any changes on the Python

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
downsides pointed out above we have decided to discard any changes on the Python
```

Author: Done in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/b6f2c16e23be6fdd38ee89233d13ceecd595c948 .

> side and resolve those issues with a pure-C implementation . Please refer to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
side and resolve those issues with a pure-C implementation. Please refer to
```

Author: Done in https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/17093/commits/b6f2c16e23be6fdd38ee89233d13ceecd595c948 .

2.  To follow current implementation standards, documentation should be attached
    directly to the Python source code.

The first version of this proposal suggested the C implementation above as one
viable solution. However, due to the downsides pointed above we have decided to

> implement that entirely in C. Please refer to [implementation]_ for details.

Reviewer 4: I'm confused by "proposed C implementation, however C implementation". Should one of these say "Python"?

Alternatives
------------

Recently a new protocol to replace ``__array_function__`` entirely was proposed
by NEP 37 [6]_, which would require considerable rework by downstream libraries
that adopt ``__array_function__`` already, because of that we still believe the
``like=`` argument is beneficial for NumPy and downstream libraries. However,
that proposal wouldn't necessarily be considered a direct alternative to the

> present NEP, as it would replace NEP 18 entirely, on which this builds upon.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
present NEP, as it would replace NEP 18 entirely, upon which this builds.
```

Discussion on details about this new proposal and why that would require rework

> by downstream libraries is beyond the scopy of the present proposal.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
by downstream libraries is beyond the scope of the present proposal.
```

Is a scopy a little scope? 😂

Author: Actually a _tinY_ scopy, inheriting the 'y'. 😄
